\input texinfo
@setfilename odt2braille-user-doc.info
@documentencoding UTF-8
@include version.texi
@settitle odt2braille User Guide
@finalout

@macro sectionref{ref,title}
@ifhtml
@ref{\ref\,\title\}
@end ifhtml
@ifnothtml
\title\ (@ref{\ref\})
@end ifnothtml
@end macro

@macro tip{text}
@quotation Tip
\text\
@end quotation
@end macro

@macro note{text}
@quotation Note
\text\
@end quotation
@end macro

@macro pilcrow{}
@ifhtml
¶
@end ifhtml
@ifnothtml
pilcrow
@end ifnothtml
@end macro
@include copying.texi

@ifnothtml
@titlepage
@title odt2braille User Guide
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author by Bert Frees
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@end ifnothtml

@html
<div id="guide-container"><h1>User Guide</h1>
@end html

@contents

@ifnottex
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@node Top
@top Getting Started

The instructions are written for OpenOffice.org but should also work for LibreOffice.

@heading Installation

In order to install odt2braille, OpenOffice.org version 3.0 or later is required. 
You can find the latest version of OpenOffice.org at @url{http://download.openoffice.org/@/other.html}.
If you don't have @emph{Java} installed on your system (verify your Java version at
@url{http://www.java.com/@/en/@/download/@/installed.jsp}), make sure you include the
@emph{Java Runtime Environment (JRE)} to the download. Java 6 is required. If you choose not to download OpenOffice.org with Java
you can easily install Java afterwards. You can get the latest version from @url{http://java.com/@/en/}.

To add the odt2braille extension, launch OpenOffice.org and open [@emph{Tools > Extension Manager...}].
First remove any older versions of odt2braille. Then choose @emph{Add...}, select the odt2braille 
installation package and follow the steps. You can download the latest version from 
@url{http://odt2braille.@/sourceforge.@/net/@/downloads.html}.

@note{Make sure the installation package is an @emph{.oxt} file. It might happen that Internet Explorer saves it as a 
@emph{.zip} file. In this case, just rename the file back to @emph{.oxt}.}

It is strongly recommended that you also download and install the @emph{odt2braille fonts}:
@url{http://odt2braille.svn.sourceforge.net/@/viewvc/@/odt2braille/@/Odt2BrailleAddOn/@/fonts/@/odt2braille6.ttf} for 6-dot
Braille and @url{http://odt2braille.svn.sourceforge.net/@/viewvc/@/odt2braille/@/Odt2BrailleAddOn/@/fonts/@/odt2braille8.ttf}
for 8-dot Braille.

@note{Make sure you install the fonts @emph{after} the plugin has been installed. Doing it the other way around may cause
the Braille preview window to show a bunch of meaningless squares or periods instead of Braille symbols.}

Finally, when everything is installed, restart OpenOffice.org and you're ready to go.

@heading OpenOffice.org and LibreOffice Accessibility

OpenOffice.org and LibreOffice are poorly accessible with traditional screen readers on Windows. 
Accessing these office suites with the newer screen reader NVDA (NonVisual Desktop Access 
@url{http://www.nvda-project.org/}) appears to work better. Mac OS users can access OpenOffice.org
with VoiceOver (@url{http://www.apple.com/@/accessibility/@/voiceover/}); Linux users can access it 
with Orca (@url{http://live.gnome.org/@/Orca}). (Some screen readers may provide good access to the
user interface but not to document content, for example, the text alternative for an image.)
However, access to OpenOffice.org or LibreOffice does not necessarily imply that the user interface
of an extension is accessible in the same way. The odt2braille project would greatly appreciate any
feedback about the accessibility of the extension (with information on which 
OpenOffice.org/LibreOffice version, which screen reader version, which operating system, 
etcetera you use the extension).

@heading Introduction

This guide explains how to create a document in OpenOffice.org Writer and prepare it for Braille 
production. You can find more help on working with Writer at 
@url{http://wiki.services.openoffice.org/@/wiki/@/Documentation/@/OOo3_User_Guides/@/Writer_Guide}.

After installing odt2braille, a whole new range of user preferences will become available.
Because of the broad range of Braille formatting conventions in use worldwide, odt2braille provides a lot of
flexibility. Users are able to adjust the Braille layout in detail, just like they can fully customize
the print layout.

To make sure that non-technical users will not be overwhelmed with possibilities, they have the option to choose
from a series of @emph{formal} Braille rules, e.g. the @emph{BANA principles of print to Braille transcription}
(see @url{http://www.brl.org/formats/}). This will considerably limit their freedom, but it will also greatly
simplify the production of valid and well-formatted Braille.

What follows next is a detailed overview of all possibilities odt2braille offers.

@menu
* Authoring Braille::
* Embossing Braille::
* Exporting Braille::
@end menu

@node Authoring Braille
@chapter Authoring Braille

@menu
* Languages::
* Paragraphs::
* Headings::
* Lists::
* Tables::
* Textboxes::
* Images::
* Captions::
* Notes::
* Special Typeface::
* Page Numbering::
* Preliminary Pages::
* Volume Management::
* Title Page::
* List of Special Symbols::
* Transcriber's Notes::
* Table of Contents::
* Bibliographies::
* Mathematics::
* Inserting Literal Braille::
* Braille-only Material::
* Hyphenation::
* Templates::
@end menu

	@node Languages
	@section Languages
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				OpenOffice.org allows you to write documents in various languages or mix multiple languages within the 
				same document. You can set the language for the whole document, individual paragraphs, or even 
				individual words and characters. The language tools can be found in [@emph{Tools > Languages}].
				@item
				Languages can be associated with @emph{Braille translation tables} in [@emph{File > Braille Settings…}]. The 
				translation table for the whole document can be set with the main language option
				on the @emph{General} tab. A contraction level can also be chosen. If the document contains 
				multiple languages, each additional language can be linked to a translation table and contraction 
				level in the @emph{Languages} tab.
				@item
				Translation tables are available for all Western European languages, Modern Hebrew, some Asian languages 
				and even some minority languages like Gaelic and Esperanto.
			@end itemize
	
	@node Paragraphs
	@section Paragraphs

		@subheading OpenOffice.org

			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In OpenOffice.org, all regular text between @emph{@pilcrow{} markers} is considered a paragraph 
				(@pilcrow{} markers can be made visible by selecting [@emph{View > Nonprinting Characters}]). 
				@item
				Each paragraph has got a formatting @emph{style}. Paragraph styles can be assigned and modified in 
				[@emph{Format > Styles and Formatting (F11)}].
				@item
				All paragraphs will be transcribed as Braille paragraphs, except		
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					@sectionref{Headings,headings},
					@item
					@sectionref{Captions,captions},
					@item
					paragraphs inside a @sectionref{Lists,list},
					@item
					inside a @sectionref{Tables,table},
					@item
					inside a @sectionref{Notes,note},
					@item
					or on the @sectionref{Title Page,title page}.
				@end itemize
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille

			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				By default, paragraphs are rendered in @emph{indented paragraph style} (first line cell 3, runovers cell 1
				and	not separated by blank lines.
				@item
				Paragraph settings can be altered in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > Paragraphs}]. You can link each used
				paragraph style with a different Braille formatting style.
				@item
				Braille formatting settings for paragraphs include spacing, alignment and margins. You can control
				how many lines of a paragraph must be printed at least at the bottom of a page (@emph{Orphan control}).
				Moreover, you can protect a paragraph from being split across multiple pages (@emph{Don't split}),
				and you can keep a paragraph together with the first line of the next (@emph{Keep with next}). 
				@item
				By default, empty paragraphs are dropped in the Braille edition. By checking the option
				@emph{Keep empty paragraphs}, an empty paragraph is brailled as an empty line.
			@end itemize

	@node Headings
	@section Headings

		@subheading OpenOffice.org

			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In order for a paragraph to be interpreted by odt2braille as a @emph{heading}, 
				following conditions must be true:
				
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					An @emph{outline level} has to be assigned to the text.
					This can be achieved in two ways:
					
					@itemize @minus
						@item
						Outline levels can be permanently linked to paragraph styles in [@emph{Tools > Outline Numbering}].
						@item
						If no outline level is linked to the current paragraph style, a level can still be assigned 
						to the text by setting @emph{Outline Level} in [@emph{Format > Paragraph > Outline & Numbering}].
					@end itemize
					
					By default, the paragraph styles @emph{Heading 1}, @emph{Heading 2}, etc. have outline levels 1, 2, etc.					
					The navigator [@emph{View > Navigator (F5)}] provides an overview of all headings in a document
					and the outline levels.
					@item
					In addition, a heading should not be placed on the @sectionref{Title Page, title page} or inside a 
					@sectionref{Lists,list}, @sectionref{Tables,table} or @sectionref{Notes,note}.
				@end itemize
				
				@item
				To enable automatic numbering or bulleting of headings, set @emph{Numbering Style} 
				[@emph{Format > Paragraph > Outline & Numbering}] to @emph{Outline Numbering}.
				@item
				The exact formatting of bullets and numbers can be determined in [@emph{Tools - Outline Numbering}].
				Alternatively, choose [@emph{Format > Bullets & Numbering}] when a heading has the cursor.
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
			
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In Braille, headings are rendered as follows:
				
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					Level 1 headings are centered and preceded and followed by a blank line.
					@item
					Level 2 headings are centered as well but are only preceded by a blank line.
					@item
					Level 3 headings begin in cell 5 (runovers too) and are preceded by a blank line.
					@item
					Headings with an outline level greater than 3 begin in cell 1 (runovers too) and are preceded by a blank line.
				@end itemize
				
				All these settings can be altered in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > Headings}]. 
				@item
				As with paragraphs, you can set spacing, alignment and margins, you can protect a heading from being split across
				multiple pages, and you can keep a heading together with the first line of the following heading or paragraph. 
				@item
				In addition, you can make a heading start on a new page.
				@item
				Numbers of headings are completely adopted in Braille.
				@item
				Bullets inside headings are automatically removed.
				@item
				Empty headings are automatically removed.
				@item
				All @sectionref{Special Typeface,special typeface} in a heading is ignored.
				@item
				Only headings inside the @emph{body} of the document (not in the preliminary section)
				are included in the @sectionref{Table of Contents,table of contents}.
				@item
				Footnotes in headings: @pxref{Notes}.
				@item
				When a regular @sectionref{Volume Management,volume} (not a preliminary or supplementary volume) doesn't 
				start with a heading, odt2braille inserts a @emph{continuation heading}: the closest preceding heading is repeated
				and suffixed with the string "@kbd{(Cont.)}". This continuation heading is included in the table of contents as well.
				@tip{Always start a volume with a heading.}
			@end itemize

	@node Lists
	@section Lists
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org

			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				Each paragraph with a @emph{Numbering Style} [@emph{Format > Paragraph > Outline & Numbering}] 
				that is not @emph{Outline Numbering} or @emph{None}, will be interpreted by odt2braille as an item of a list.
				@item
				To produce a numbered or bulleted list in OpenOffice.org, either use the @emph{numbering} and @emph{bullets} 
				icons, or use @emph{list styles}.
				
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					The numbering and bullets icons can be found on the @emph{Formatting} toolbar 
					[@emph{View > Toolbars > Formatting}] or the @emph{Bullets and Numbering} toolbar 
					[@emph{View > Toolbars > Bullets and Numbering}].
					@item
					List styles can be selected in [@emph{Format > Styles and Formatting > List Styles}]. 
					When creating a new list style, make sure the name is not of the form @kbd{L1} / @kbd{L2} / @enddots{}
				@end itemize
				
				@item
				The @emph{level} of a list item can be modified with keyboard shortcuts (@sc{tab} to move down a level, 
				@sc{shift} + @sc{tab} to move up a level) or with the @emph{Bullets and Numbering} toolbar.
				@item
				The exact formatting of lists can be determined in [@emph{Format > Bullets and Numbering}]. 
				Alternatively, if the list was created using list styles [@emph{Format > Styles and Formatting > List Styles}], 
				right click on the list style and choose @emph{Modify}.
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
			
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				All Braille formatting settings for lists can be altered in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > Lists}].
				@item
				By default, lists are brailled as follows:
				
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					Level 1 list items begin in cell 1, runovers begin in cell 5.
					@item
					Level 2 list items begin in cell 3, runovers in cell 7.
					@item
					Level 3 list items begin in cell 5, runovers in cell 9.
					@item
					List items with an outline level greater than 3 begin in cell 7, runovers in cell 11.
				@end itemize

				The entire list is preceded and following by a blank line. 

				@item
				Numbers of list items are completely adopted in Braille.
				@item
				The user can determine how bullets are brailled.
				@item
				List items or entire lists can be protected from being split across pages.
				@item
				@sectionref{Textboxes,Textboxes} and @sectionref{Images,images} that are anchored to a list item are 
				rendered only after completion of the entire list.
			@end itemize

	@node Tables
	@section Tables
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org

			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In OpenOffice.org, tables are created with [@emph{Table > Insert > Table}] or [@emph{Insert > Table}] 
				or with the @emph{Table} toolbar [@emph{View > Toolbars > Table}].
				@item
				The first row(s) of a table can be defined as @emph{column headings} by checking the @emph{Headings} box. 
				Set multiple heading rows by checking @emph{Repeat headings}.
				@item
				To add a @sectionref{Captions,caption} to the table, place the cursor inside the table and choose 
				[@emph{Insert > Caption}]. In order for a table caption to be correctly linked to the table, 
				it must be placed directly beneath the table and no other frame 
				(i.e. @sectionref{Textboxes,textbox} or @sectionref{Images,image}) can be anchored to it.
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
			
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In Braille, tables are by default rendered in @emph{stairstep format}:
				
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					Column 1 table cells begin in cell 1, runovers too.
					@item
					Column 2 table cells begin in cell 3, runovers too.
					@item
					@enddots{}
					@item
					Table cells in column 10 and beyond begin in cell 19.
				@end itemize
				
				@item
				However, is it also possible to render tables in @emph{linear format}. In this case, all cells in a table row 
				are joined together. The user can choose the @emph{column delimiter} symbol which separates the cells.
				@item
				Table rows can be protected from being split across Braille pages.
				@item
				All table settings can be accessed in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > Tables}].
				@item
				Only regular text is retained in a table cell, all other elements are dropped or transposed.
				If a table cell contains multiple paragraphs, these are first serialized.
				@item
				Table lines are only shown in Braille if they are present in print. 
				A table line is represented by a series of unspaced Braille dots 2356 (top table line) or 1245 
				(bottom table line), extended across the full width of the Braille page. 
				A table inside a larger textbox is enclosed by full table lines (Braille dots 123456). 
				If no table lines are shown in print, the table is preceded and/or followed by a blank line.
				@item
				If column headings are present, these table rows are separated from the table body by a series of 
				unspaced Braille dots 25, extended across the full width of the Braille page.
				@item
				If a @sectionref{Captions,caption} is correctly linked to the table, it is centered and placed directly 
				below the top table line (or top blank line if the table line is absent). 
				A blank line is inserted between the caption and the actual table content. 
				@item
				All @sectionref{Notes,footnotes} are collected beneath the table body, but above the bottom table line 
				(or bottom blank line if the table line is absent). 
				Footnotes in the table caption are placed directly below the caption.
				@item
				Empty table cells are indicated with an ellipsis (Braille dots 5-5-5). 
				This usage is explained on the @sectionref{Transcriber's Notes,transcriber's notes page}.
				@item
				When a table contains other tables, @sectionref{Lists,lists}, @sectionref{Textboxes,textboxes} or 
				@sectionref{Images,images}, these elements are moved outside the table. 
				Every transposition is indicated by a double dash (Braille dots 36-36-36-36) at the element's original location. 
				An explaining @sectionref{Transcriber's Notes,transcriber's note} is inserted before the table. 
				Only after completion of the entire table, all previously omitted material is rendered. 
				Each element is preceded by another transcriber's note explaining it was moved from it's original location.
				@tip{Do not place other tables, lists, textboxes or images inside a table.}
				@item
				A merged table cell is processed as if its whole content were in the left- and uppermost 'sub'-cell. 
				The other (empty) 'sub'-cells are not shown in Braille. This currently also applies to right-to-left
				writing systems such as Hebrew.
				@tip{Try to avoid merged cells.}
			@end itemize
			
	@node Textboxes
	@section Textboxes
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In OpenOffice.org, textboxes can be produced by choosing [@emph{Insert > Frame}]. 
				Options can be modified later in [@emph{Format > Frame/Object}]. 
				On the @emph{Type} tab, the anchor type can be selected. 
				The anchor is the basis of the position and behavior of the textbox within a document. 
				It makes the textbox move with the object it is anchored to. 
				You can anchor frames as a character or to a page, paragraph, or character. 
				In addition, if a textbox has been placed inside another textbox, it can be anchored to this outer frame. 
				The anchor is symbolized by a gray marker, which is only visible if the textbox is selected.
				@item
				To add a @sectionref{Captions,caption} to the textbox, place the cursor inside the textbox and choose 
				[@emph{Insert > Caption}]. In order for a caption to be correctly linked to the textbox by odt2braille, 
				one of the following must be true:
				
				@itemize @bullet
					@item
					The textbox is anchored to a caption.
					@item
					The paragraph immediately following the object the textbox is anchored to is a caption, 
					and no other frame (i.e. textbox or @sectionref{Images,image}) is anchored to it.
					@item
					The last paragraph of the textbox is a caption and no other frame is anchored to it.
				@end itemize
				
				A caption that has been inserted through [@emph{Insert > Caption}] is automatically linked to the textbox.
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				If textboxes are anchored as a character or to a paragraph or character, they are rendered in Braille after 
				completion of the paragraph or heading that contains the anchor.
				@item
				If textboxes are anchored to another textbox, they are rendered inside this outer textbox, 
				before any other material it contains.
				@item
				Textboxes are omitted in Braille if they are anchored to a page.
				@item
				Textboxes that are anchored to a @sectionref{Lists,list item} are rendered only after completion of the entire list.
				@item
				Textboxes that are anchored to a @sectionref{Tables,table cell} are rendered only after completion of the entire table.
				@item
				Textboxes that are anchored to a @sectionref{Notes,note} are replaced by a double dash 
				(Braille dots 36-36-36-36), indicating the omission.
				@item
				Box lines are only shown in Braille if they are present in print. 
				A box line is represented by a series of unspaced Braille dots 2356 (top table line) or 1245 
				(bottom table line), extended across the full width of the Braille page. 
				If no box lines are shown in print, the textbox is preceded and/or followed by a blank line.
				@item
				If a @sectionref{Captions,caption} is correctly linked to the textbox, it is centered and placed directly 
				below the top box line (or top blank line if the box line is absent). 
				A blank line is inserted between the caption and the actual content of the box.
				@item
				All material inside a textbox is retained in Braille. 
				@sectionref{Headings,Headings} are included in the @sectionref{Table of Contents,table of contents}.
			@end itemize
			
	@node Images
	@section Images
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In OpenOffice.org, images can be inserted by choosing [@emph{Insert > Picture > From File}]. 
				Options can be modified later in [@emph{Format > Picture}]. Like @sectionref{Textboxes,textboxes}, 
				an image can be anchored as a character or to a page, paragraph, character, or frame.
				@item
				To add a @sectionref{Captions,caption} to the image, select the image and choose [@emph{Insert > Caption}]. 
				In order for a caption to be correctly linked to the image by odt2braille, one of the following must be true:
				
				@itemize
					@item
					The image is anchored to a caption (@emph{Anchored to paragraph, to character or as character}).
					@item
					The paragraph immediately following the object the image is anchored to is a caption, 
					and no other frame (i.e. @sectionref{Textboxes,textbox} or image) is anchored to it.
				@end itemize
				
				A caption that has been inserted through [@emph{Insert > Caption}] is automatically linked to the image.
				
				@item
				For each image, a title and/or description can be provided in [@emph{Format > Object > Description}]. 
				Alternatively, the title can be set with the @emph{Alternative (Text only)} field in 
				[@emph{Format > Picture > Options}].
				@tip{The image description should be as brief and concise as possible.}
				@note{OpenOffice 3.2 and older versions have a bug that deletes an image’s text alternatives 
				(Title and Description) if the anchor is modified or when a caption is added. To avoid this, the text 
				alternatives should be added after modifying the anchor or after adding a caption.}
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In Braille, images are replaced by a @sectionref{Transcriber's Notes,transcriber's note}, which includes
				
				@enumerate
					@item
					The image @sectionref{Captions,caption} (if one is correctly linked to the image).
					@item
					A note saying that the image is not reproduced in Braille.
					@item
					The image title (if one is defined).
					@item
					An alternative desciption (if one is defined).
				@end enumerate

				@item
				If images are anchored as a character or to a paragraph or character, they are rendered in Braille after 
				completion of the paragraph or heading that contains the anchor.
				@item
				If images are anchored to a @sectionref{Textboxes,textbox}, they are rendered inside this textbox, 
				before any other material it contains.
				@item
				Images are omitted in Braille if they are anchored to a page.
				@item
				Images that are anchored to a @sectionref{Lists,list item} are rendered only after completion of the entire list.
				@item
				Images that are anchored to a @sectionref{Tables,table cell} are rendered only after completion of the entire table.
				@item
				Images that are anchored to a @sectionref{Notes,note} are replaced by a double dash (Braille dots 36-36-36-36), 
				indicating the omission.

			@end itemize
	
	@node Captions
	@section Captions
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				To add a caption to an object in OpenOffice.org, select this object and choose [@emph{Insert > Caption}]. 
				odt2braille treats all text elements (with the exception of @sectionref{Headings,headings}), 
				with a paragraph style [@emph{Format > Styles and Formatting > Paragraph Styles}] that is
				
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					@emph{Caption},
					@item
					@emph{Table},
					@item
					@emph{Drawing},
					@item
					@emph{Illustration} or 
					@item
					@emph{Text},
				@end itemize
				
				as captions. 
				You can also add your own caption style by right-clicking on one of the above styles and choosing @emph{New}.
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				A caption is only rendered in Braille if odt2braille links the caption to an object. 
				Captions can be linked to @sectionref{Tables,tables}, @sectionref{Textboxes,textboxes} or 
				@sectionref{Images,images}. For more details on the linking of captions to objects, 
				see the appropriate sections.
				@item
				Table captions and textbox sections are centered and placed directly below the top table/textbox line 
				(or top blank line if the table/textbox line is absent). 
				A blank line is inserted between the caption and the actual table/textbox content. 
				Image captions are contained in the transcriber's note that represents the image.
				@item
				Footnotes in captions: @pxref{Notes}.
			@end itemize
	
	@node Notes
	@section Notes
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				To insert a note in an OpenOffice.org document, put the cursor where you want the note reference marker 
				to appear, then select [@emph{Insert > Footnote/Endnote}]. 
				Footnotes are displayed at the bottom of the page containing their corresponding reference. 
				By default, endnotes are collected at the end of the entire document. 
				To collect endnotes at the end of the OpenOffice.org @emph{section} that contains the note reference, choose 
				[@emph{Format > Sections}], select a section, choose [@emph{Options > Footnotes/Endnotes}] and check the 
				option @emph{Collect at end of section}. Sections can be inserted by choosing [@emph{Insert > Section}].
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In Braille, note references are preceded by the unspaced @emph{reference indicator} (Braille dots 35-35)
				and a number indicator (in case of a number) or a letter indicator (in case of a letter).
				References are separated from surrounding text by at least one blank cell.
				@item
				Footnotes and endnotes are always preceded by their corresponding reference. 
				No blank lines are left before, after or between notes.
				@item
				Only regular text is retained inside a note, all other elements are dropped.
				If the note contains multiple paragraphs, these are first serialized. Every omission of an element 
				is indicated by a double dash (Braille dots 36-36-36-36) at the element's original location.
				@item
				Footnotes begin in cell 7, runovers begin in cell 5. Footnotes in @sectionref{Paragraphs,paragraphs}, 
				@sectionref{Headings, headings}, @sectionref{Captions, captions} and @sectionref{Lists,list items} are 
				rendered immediately below the paragraph, heading, caption or list item. 
				Footnotes in @sectionref{Tables,tables} are are collected beneath the table body, but above the bottom 
				table line (or bottom blank line if the table line is absent).
				@item
				Endnotes are collected in @emph{note sections}. Each note section begins on a new page. 
				The fully capitalized heading ("@kbd{NOTES}") is centered at the top of the page and followed by a blank line. 
				This heading is not included in the @sectionref{Table of Contents, table of contents}.
				Then the endnotes are listed, ordered by their appearance in print. Each endnote begins in cell 1, 
				runovers begin in cell 3. When the note section is complete, subsequent text is resumed on a new page. 
				Note sections can appear at various places in the Braille document:
				
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					If an endnote reference is contained in an OpenOffice.org section that has the 
					@emph{Collect at end of section} option checked, the note is brailled accordingly at the end of that section.
					@item
					Else, if an endnote reference is placed on the @sectionref{Preliminary Pages,preliminary pages}, 
					the corresponding note is rendered at the end of the preliminary section.
					@item
					All remaining endnotes of a @sectionref{Volume Management,volume} are collected at the very end of that volume.
				@end itemize
				
			@end itemize
	
	@node Special Typeface
	@section Special Typeface
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In OpenOffice.org, you can apply many formats to characters using the [@emph{Format > Character...}] window
				and the buttons on the @emph{Formatting} toolbar ([@emph{View > Toolbars > Formatting}]). Text can also 
				be formatted by applying a character style ([@emph{Format > Styles and Formatting > Character Styles}]).
				@item
				The relevant options for odt2braille are @emph{Bold}, @emph{Italic}, @emph{Underline} and @emph{(Small) Capitals}.
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				Braille formatting settings for characters can be altered in [File > Braille Settings > Special Typeface].				
				The user can link each used character style with a different Braille formatting style.
				Bold, Italic, Underline and Capitals can be turned on or off in Braille, irrespective of how the text is 
				actually formatted in print. By default, the print version in followed.
				@item
				In English Braille, a single italic word is prefixed by the unspaced @emph{italic sign} (Braille dots 46). If more
				than three consecutive words are italicized, the first word is preceded by the @emph{double italic sign}
				(Braille dots 46-46), and the last word by the single italic sign.
				@item
				A single bold word is prefixed by the unspaced @emph{bold sign} (Braille dots 456). If more
				than three consecutive words are boldfaced, the first word is preceded by the @emph{double bold sign}
				(Braille dots 456-456), and the last word by the single bold sign.
				@item
				Other special typefaces like @emph{underline}, @emph{small caps}, etc. are not indicated in English Braille.
				@item
				All special typeface in @sectionref{Headings,headings} is ignored in the Braille edition.
				@item
				In other @sectionref{Languages,languages}, other rules for indicating special typeface might apply.
			@end itemize

	@node Page Numbering
	@section Page Numbering
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				To add a page number, put the cursor where you want the number to appear, then select 
				[@emph{Insert > Fields > Page Number}]. If you want to number all your pages automatically, insert a
				page number in the page header [@emph{Insert > Header > Default}] or page footer 
				[@emph{Insert > Footer > Default}].
				@item
				odt2braille will only proces the @emph{first} page number in a header or footer (in that order).
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				All pages of text in the Braille edition carry consecutive Braille page numbers starting
				with arabic 1 in the first volume (or a higher value specified by the option @emph{Start numbering at}). 
				In subsequent @sectionref{Volume Management,volumes}, pages of text are numbered consecutively from
				volume to volume.
				Preliminary page numbers are either prefixed by the unspaced letter @emph{p}, or rendered in Roman 
				numerals, the choice is up to the user. Each preliminary section is numbered individually, 
				starting with @emph{p1} or @emph{i}.
				By default, the Braille page number is displayed in the bottom right corner of the page, with no fewer 
				than three blank cells left between the text and the number. The user can also decide to place
				page numbers at the top, or not display them at all.
				@item
				If the source document contains page numbers, they can be included in the Braille version as well.				
				By default, print page numbers are displayed in the top right corner of each Braille page (except on
				@sectionref{Preliminary Pages,preliminary pages}), again with no fewer than three blank cells left between
				the text and the number. The number can also be placed at the bottom. 
				When print page numbers and Braille page numbers are both placed at the top or bottom, they are rendered 
				next to each other, print number first, with a space in between.
				@item
				If material on a print page cannot be contained on a single Braille page and must be continued on one
				or more pages, the same print page number is placed in the top right corner of each of these pages.
				The number is prefixed by the unspaced letter @emph{a} (brailled without the letter 
				indicator) for the first continued page, the letter @emph{b} for the second, etc. 
				@item
				Optionally, the user can decide to display the @emph{range} of print pages contained in a Braille page
				(instead of only the page number of the @emph{first} print page). If the first page in this range is a 
				continued print page, it is prefixed with a letter as usual.
				@item
				When a new print page begins @emph{within} a Braille page, a @emph{page change indicator}, a line of 
				unspaced Braille dots 36, can be produced, with or without the new print page number placed on the same 
				line at the right margin. No space is left between this indicator and the first symbol of the page number.
				@item
				By default, empty pages are completely ignored. If this setting is disabled, a @emph{combined} 
				print page number will be displayed whenever empty pages are encountered: the number of the first empty 
				page is combined with that of the page on which text reappears, e.g. 5-7. If lettered continuation 
				pages are required, they carry only the number of the page on which text reappears.
				@item
				Another option is to treat @emph{unnumbered} print pages as if they were a part of the preceding page
				(as if their was no page break).
				@item
				All page number settings can be found in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > Page Numbers}].								
			@end itemize
	
	@node Preliminary Pages
	@section Preliminary Pages
	
		Preliminary pages are those pages that precede the actual text of the document. These can include for example
		a title page, a special symbols page, a transcriber's note page, cover material, about the author, a dedication,
		acknowledgements, an abstract, a table of contents, author's notes, a preface, 
		a foreword, an introduction or a prologue, etc.
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				Which content is included in the preliminary section and the order of items is totally up to the transcriber. 
				All preliminary content must be placed inside a level 1 section (not nested in another section) named 
				@kbd{PreliminaryPages}. In OpenOffice.org, sections can be inserted by choosing [@emph{Insert > Section}].
				An overview of all sections the document contains and there level is provided by the navigator 
				[@emph{View > Navigator (F5)}].
				@item
				If a preliminary section has been defined, the transcriber has the option to include
				a list of special symbols, a transcriber's note page and a table of contents.
				These options can be found on the @emph{General}, @emph{Table of Contents} and @emph{Special Symbols} tabs 
				in [@emph{File > Braille Settings…}].
				@item
				Another possibility is to create a preliminary volume. This option should be checked if
				more than 80-90 Braille pages are required for the preliminary pages in the first volume to include 
				all items (@pxref{Volume Management}).
				@item
				All content before the @kbd{PreliminaryPages} section will be ignored.
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				If a preliminary section has been defined in OpenOffice.org, every 
				@sectionref{Volume Management,Braille volume} or supplement will be preceded by a number of preliminary pages.
				@item
				Some pages (i.e. the @sectionref{Title Page,title page}, 
				the @sectionref{List of Special Symbols,special symbols page}, 
				the @sectionref{Transcriber's Notes,transcriber's notes page} and
				the @sectionref{Table of Contents,table of contents}) are repeated in every Braille volume. 
				However, their content is different for each volume.
				All other pages only appear in the @emph{extended} preliminary section. This section is either included in the 
				@emph{preliminary volume} (if present) or in volume 1.
				@item
				The print order of items is completely adapted in Braille. The special symbols page, transcriber's
				notes page and table of contents are placed (in that order) at the very end of the preliminary pages, 
				before any possible @sectionref{Notes,note sections}.
				@item
				Preliminary pages are distinguished from normal pages by a different @sectionref{Page Numbering,page numbering}.
				@item
				The actual volume body that follows the preliminary section always starts on a new right-hand Braille page.
			
			@end itemize
	
	@node Volume Management
	@section Volume Management
	
		Often, because documents are too long to be bound in one single Braille book, they are arranged in @emph{volumes}.
		@tip{Typically a volume should have around 80-90 one-sided pages (the page count includes all pages, including 
		the preliminary pages). Ideally, the next volume starts at a logical place, such as the beginning of a new chapter.
		As a guideline, there should not be a difference of more than 15 pages between two volumes.}
		Also, appendixes, glossaries, indexes, @sectionref{Bibliographies,bibliographies} etc. are often more useful 
		when bound in separate @emph{supplementary} volumes (@emph{supplements}).
		Finally, the @sectionref{Preliminary Pages,extended preliminary pages} (i.e. with all preliminary content 
		included) are sometimes bound in a separate @emph{preliminary} volume, when the first volume would otherwise 
		become to long.		
		
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				OpenOffice.org, by default, puts the entire document in one single volume.
				@item
				To create a volume manually, insert a level 1 section [@emph{Insert > Section}] and name it @kbd{Volume1}, 
				@kbd{Volume2}, etc. It is important to arrange volumes in this order, otherwise they will not be accepted.
				@item
				A supplementary volume can be created by inserting a section named @kbd{Supplement1}, @kbd{Supplement2}, etc. 
				Make sure you put supplementy volumes after the last regular volume and in the right order, 
				otherwise they will not be accepted.
				@item
				If no regular volumes have been defined manually, everything between the 
				@sectionref{Preliminary Pages, preliminary pages} (or beginning of the document) and supplement 1
				(or end of the document) is equal to volume 1.
				@item
				If a preliminary section is present, a preliminary volume can be created by checking the
				Create preliminary volume option in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > General}].
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In Braille, every volume or supplement has its own preliminary section (if enabled by the user). 
				Both the preliminary section and the volume body start on a new right-hand Braille page.
				If a preliminary volume is created, it contains the @sectionref{Preliminary Pages,extended preliminary pages}, 
				but no actual volume body.
				@item
				When a regular volume doesn't start with a heading, odt2braille automatically inserts a 
				@sectionref{Headings,continuation heading}: the closest preceding heading is repeated and suffixed with
				the string "@kbd{(Cont.)}".
			@end itemize
	
	@node Title Page
	@section Title Page
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				To create a title page, insert a section named @kbd{TitlePage} [@emph{Insert > Section}] (this does not
				have to be a level 1 section). The title page can be placed anywhere, but it is recommended to put it at
				the beginning of the document. If a @sectionref{Preliminary Pages,preliminary section} is present, 
				place the title page inside of it, so that it is repeated in each volume.
				@tip{The title page should be the very first page.}
				@item
				If a title page has been defined, the transcriber has the option to include a
				transcription information block. Furthermore, if the title page is a preliminary page, a 
				volume information block can be included as well.				
				These options can be found in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > General}].
				The Braille formatting of the blocks can be specified by the @emph{Paragraph style} fields.
				The name of the transcriber can be set with the @emph{Transcriber} field.
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				The print order of items on the title page is adopted in Braille. The volume information block 
				and transcription information blocks are placed (in that order) at the very end of the title page.
				@item
				The volume information block contains the volume identification, the total number of volumes, the page 
				range, etc. 
				@* Examples:
@example
@emph{In 9 volumes and 2 supplements}
@emph{Volume 2}
@emph{Braille pages p1-p16 and 1-72}
@emph{Print pages 46-79}
@end example
@example
@emph{In 1 preliminary and 5 volumes}
@emph{Preliminary volume}
@emph{Braille pages p1-p81}
@end example
				@item
				The transcription information block contains the transcriber's name, the year of Braille transcription, 
				etc.
				@* Example:
@example
@emph{Transcribed 2010 by Bert Frees with odt2braille}
@end example
			@end itemize
	
	@node List of Special Symbols
	@section List of Special Symbols
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				If a preliminary section has been defined, the transcriber has the option to include a list of 
				special symbols in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > Special Symbols}]. He or she can also decide 
				which symbols will be shown, in which order, under which conditions (always, only in the first 
				volume, or only when actually used in the current volume), and how they are described.
				The list heading can be modified as well. By default, it is set 
				to "@kbd{SPECIAL SYMBOLS USED IN THIS VOLUME}".
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				A special symbols list is included in the @sectionref{Preliminary Pages,preliminary pages} of each 
				@sectionref{Volume Management,volume}. The actual content varies between volumes. The special symbols 
				list begins on a new Braille page. The heading is centered at the top of the page. 
				It is not included in the @sectionref{Table of Contents, table of contents}.
				@item
				After a blank line, the list follows. Each Braille symbol begins in cell 1 and is followed, after one 
				blank cell, by its identifying dot numbers, enclosed in parentheses, and its description.
				Runovers begin in cell 3. These are the symbols that are listed by default:
				
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					@kbd{⠰ (56) Letter indicator} ,
					@item
					@kbd{⠼ (3456) Number indicator} , 
					@item
					@kbd{⠔⠔ (35, 35) Note reference indicator} ,
					@item
					@kbd{⠠⠄ (6, 3) Transcriber's note indicator} ,
					@item
					@kbd{⠨ (46) Italic indicator} ,
					@item
					@kbd{⠸ (456) Boldface indicator} ,
					@item
					@kbd{⠤⠤⠤⠤ (36, 36, 36, 36) Double dash indicating an omission} , and
					@item
					@kbd{⠐⠐⠐ (5, 5, 5) Ellipsis indicating empty table cell} .
				@end itemize
				
				The exact Braille dots of some symbols can differ between @sectionref{Languages,languages}.
				@item
				If no symbols are listed, the special symbols list is not displayed.	
			@end itemize
	
	@node Transcriber's Notes
	@section Transcriber's Notes
		
		A transcriber's note is a note that is added in the Braille edition by the transcriber but not		
		shown in the print text. Some notes are inserted between other items in the document body,
		some notes are displayed on a separate @emph{transcriber's note page} in the preliminary section.
		
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				Transcriber's notes are automatically inserted by odt2braille. A user can only control whether or not 
				a transcriber's note page is included in the preliminary pages, through the option 
				Include transcriber's note page in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > General}]. 
				The transcriber's note page heading can be modified in the field 
				below. By default, it is set to "@kbd{TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES}".
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				Transcriber's notes that appear throughout the document are brailled in @emph{paragraph form}. A note
				consists of one or more @emph{note paragraphs}. Each note paragraph begins in cell 7, runovers begin in 
				cell 5. No blank lines are left before, after or between note paragraphs.
				The complete note is preceded and followed by the unspaced @emph{transcriber's note indicator} (Braille dots 6-3).
				@item
				The transcriber's note page begins on a new Braille page. The heading is centered at the top of the page.
				It is not included in the @sectionref{Table of Contents, table of contents}.
				After a blank line the notes are listed. Notes are brailled as indented @sectionref{Paragraphs,paragraphs} 
				(first line cell 3, runovers cell 1, no blank lines between notes). No @emph{transcriber's note indicators} 
				are used. If the transcriber's note page doesn't contain any notes, it is not displayed.
			@end itemize
	
	@node Table of Contents
	@section Table of Contents
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In OpenOffice, a table of contents can be added to the document by selecting
				[@emph{Insert > Indexes and Tables > Indexes and Tables}] and choosing @emph{Table of Contents} for @emph{Type}.
				However, these tables are not adopted in the Braille version. Instead, odt2braille generates its own table of 
				contents, and the user is given the option to include this table of contents
				in the preliminary pages of each volume. This option is found in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > Table of Contents}].
				The table heading can be modified in the field below. By default, it is set to "@kbd{CONTENTS}".
				@tip {If a table of contents is present in print, include it in the Braille version also.}
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				The table of contents is rendered at the very end of the @sectionref{Preliminary Pages,preliminary section},
				before any possible @sectionref{Notes,note sections}. The table of contents begins on a new Braille page. 
				The heading is centered at the top of the page and followed by a blank line.
				@item
				The actual content varies between volumes. On the @emph{extended} preliminary pages (either included in the
				@sectionref{Volume Management,preliminary volume}, if present, or in volume 1), the table of contents 
				lists all headings in the entire document. Only headings in the @emph{body} of the document are included. 
				In all other regular volumes, the table of contents is limited to headings in that particular volume.
				No table of contents is included in supplementary volumes.
				@item
				Each table entry is composed of
				
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					the heading,
					@item
					[the @sectionref{Page Numbering,print page number}, prefixed with the appropriate letter if the heading
					begins on a continued page], and
					@item
					[the Braille page number]
				@end itemize
				
				Print and Braille page numbers in the table of contents can be enabled or disabled.
				
				@item
				By default, level 1 headings begin in cell 1, runovers in cell 5. Level 2 headings begin in cell 3, runovers 
				in cell 7. Level 3 headings begin in cell 5, runovers in cell 9. Headings with an outline level greater than 
				3 begin in cell 7, runovers in cell 11. All these settings can be altered
				in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > Table of Contents}].
				@item
				The print and Braille page numbers are placed to end at the right margin of the Braille line on which the 
				heading ends. If space allows it, a sequence of unspaced @emph{guide dots}, preceded and followed by a blank cell, 
				is inserted between the heading and the page numbers. The Braille symbol for these guide dots can be specified
				by the user, the default value is Braille dots 5.				
			@end itemize
	
	@node Bibliographies
	@section Bibliographies
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In OpenOffice.org, references to source material can be added through 
				[@emph{Insert > Indexes and Tables > Bibliography Entry}]. Although you can define sources within the 
				document itself, creating and keeping a @emph{bibliographic database} allows reuse in other documents and 
				saves a lot of time. Select [@emph{Tools > Bibliography Database}] to show this database.
				@item
				To generate a bibliography that lists all referenced sources, put the cursor where you want this bibliography
				to appear, then select [@emph{Insert > Indexes and Tables > Indexes and Tables}] and choose 
				@emph{Bibliography} for @emph{Type}. The bibliography heading can be modified in the @emph{Title} field.
				@tip{Bibliographies are often more useful when bound in a supplementary volume.}
			@end itemize

		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				In Braille, references to bibliography entries are rendered exactly as in print (the short name or a number
				enclosed by square brackets).
				@item
				The bibliography begins on a new Braille page. On the first line, the heading is centered and followed by a
				blank line. It is not included in the @sectionref{Table of Contents, table of contents}. The actual 
				bibliography entries are brailled like any other @sectionref{Lists,list}. Each item begins in cell 1, runovers 
				in cell 3. The entries are translated literally, including @sectionref{Special Typeface,special typeface}.
				After completion of the bibliography, subsequent text is resumed on a new page.
			@end itemize
			
	@node Mathematics
	@section Mathematics
	
		@subheading OpenOffice.org
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				To insert a mathematical expression in OpenOffice.org, go to [@emph{Insert > Object > Formula}].
				The equation editor will open at the bottom of the screen, and the floating Selection window appears.
				The equation editor uses a markup language to represent formulas.
				For more information on inserting math, read the math guide at 
				@url{http://wiki.services.openoffice.org/@/wiki/@/Documentation/@/OOo3_User_Guides/@/Math_Guide}.				
			@end itemize
			
		@subheading Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				Mathematical equations are conveyed to Braille through the use of specialized math Braille codes.
				Supported math codes are @emph{Nemeth} (generally accepted in the United States), 
				@emph{Marburg} (Germany), @emph{UK Maths} (United Kingdom) and @emph{Woluwe} (Flanders, Belgium).
				You can select which code you want to use in [@emph{File > Braille Settings > Mathematics}].
			@end itemize
	
	@node Inserting Literal Braille
	@section Inserting Literal Braille
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				To insert Braille characters in the document that will be rendered identically in the Braille 
				edition and the print edition, the transcriber has two possibilities.
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					In the @emph{dot pattern entry mode}, Braille strings are specified by their dot
					patterns, e.g. 12-1235-1-24-123-123-15 (@emph{"braille"} in uncontracted English Braille).
					@item
					In the @emph{six-key entry mode}, users can insert characters with the keys 
					@kbd{S} (dot 3), @kbd{D} (dot 2), @kbd{F} (dot 1), @kbd{J} (dot 4), @kbd{K} (dot 5) 
					and @kbd{L} (dot 6), as if they were using a mechanical embosser such as the
					Perkins Brailler. So to insert @emph{"braille"}, type
					@kbd{D+F}, @kbd{S+D+F+K}, @kbd{F}, @kbd{D+J}, @kbd{S+D+F}, @kbd{S+D+F}, @kbd{F+K}.
					Spaces are entered with the spacebar as usual and the @sc{enter} / @sc{return} key 
					generates a hard return without starting a new paragraph.
					@note{Not all keyboards support this feature!}
				@end itemize
				
				These modes can be activated in the menu [@emph{Insert > Braille Characters}].
			@end itemize
	
	@node Braille-only Material
	@section Braille-only Material
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				Text can be formatted such that it will only be rendered in the Braille edition of the document,
				but not in the print edition.
				@itemize @minus
					@item
					To insert non-printing text, go to [@emph{Insert > Fields > Other… > Functions > Hidden text}].
					@item
					To insert a non-printing paragraph, go to [@emph{Insert > Fields > Other… > Functions > Hidden Paragraph}].
					In the @emph{Condition} field, enter @kbd{TRUE}.
				@end itemize
				
				You can highlight these fields by checking [@emph{View > Field Shadings}].
			@end itemize
	
	@node Hyphenation
	@section Hyphenation
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				The user can choose to split words at the end of Braille lines if they are too long. This will
				improve the layout of paragraphs. To enable hyphenation, check the corresponding box in
				[@emph{File > Braille Settings… > General}].
				@item
				For most languages, odt2braille has a hyphenation dictionary for automatic breaking of words.
				In addition, a word at the end of a Braille line is always split when it contains a @emph{hard hyphen},
				i.e. a plain minus sign ( - ). This allows for manual hyphenation.
				A more elegant solution is to use @emph{soft hyphens}, which are not brailled when the word
				appears in the middle of a Braille line. To insert a soft hyphen, go to 
				[@emph{Insert > Formatting Mark > Optional Hyphen}]. They are only visible in OpenOffice.org
				when [@emph{View > Field Shadings}] is checked.
				@note{Soft hyphens can only be used in Windows.}

			@end itemize
	
	@node Templates
	@section Templates
		
			@itemize @bullet
				@item
				When you use the same Braille settings and layout frequently, it may be a good idea to store
				these settings and layout in a @emph{template}. Simply save your document as 
				@emph{ODF Text Document Template (.ott)}.
				@item
				odt2braille also includes some predefined, real handy Braille templates. One for a simple 
				Braille document and one for a more advanced, multi-volume Braille document. Both templates
				contain a preliminary section with a titlepage. You can find them under
				[@emph{File > New > Templates and Documents > Templates > Braille Documents}].
			@end itemize
	
@node Embossing Braille
@chapter Embossing Braille

	To print a document on a Braille embosser, call the @emph{Emboss...} window from the @emph{File} menu,
	right beneath @emph{Print...}.
	
	@itemize @bullet
		@item
		Select your embosser from the dropdown list. If your embosser is not supported, please contact us
		and we will add it if possible. You can request features at 
		@url{http://sourceforge.net/@/tracker/@/?func=add&group_id=330251&atid=1385420}.
		@item
		Check that your embosser is powered on and loaded with paper. Specify the paper size in the dialog.
		If the paper is not in the list, define a "@emph{Custom}" paper size.
		@item
		Depending on the type of embosser, you can choose between single- or double-sided printing, and
		between a 6- or 8-dot matrix. In addition, some embossers have special features like 
		@emph{Character set selection}, @emph{Magazine style} and @emph{Z-folding}.
		@item
		Finally, select the number of characters per line, the number of lines per page and the margins.
	@end itemize
	
	Pressing the @emph{Emboss} button will trigger the transcription process. When the document is succesfully
	translated, you are given the option to "@emph{Preview}" the Braille output before printing, or go on and
	print the document immediately.	

@node Exporting Braille
@chapter Exporting Braille
	
	
@html
</div>
@end html

@bye
